1. What’s the difference between blocking and non-blocking I/O?

Blocking I/O

The calling process sleeps until the requested operation can be completed.
The CPU is released while waiting.
Example: a read() waits until data becomes available.

Non-blocking I/O

The operation returns immediately if it cannot be completed.
The process does not sleep.
Typically returns -EAGAIN or -EWOULDBLOCK when data is not available.
The application can try again later.


2. What happens if wait_event_interruptible() is used without a condition?
The wait queue mechanism relies on a condition becoming true.
If no meaningful condition is checked, the task may sleep indefinitely.
Even if the task is awakened, it may immediately go back to sleep because there is no state change to verify.
This can lead to missed events, deadlocks, or incorrect synchronization behavior.
A wait queue should always be associated with a shared condition that indicates when the waiting thread can proceed.


3. Why do we need a mutex along with wait queues?
Wait queues provide a mechanism for sleeping and waking tasks.
They do not protect shared data from concurrent access.
A mutex protects shared resources from race conditions while they are being read or modified.
Typically:
The mutex protects the shared state.
The wait queue allows threads to sleep until that state changes.
Both are often required for correct synchronization.


4. What happens if multiple readers are waiting?
Multiple processes or threads may be sleeping on the same wait queue.
When the wait queue is awakened:
wake_up() may wake multiple waiting tasks.
Each awakened task competes to access the shared resource.
The first task that consumes the available data may leave nothing for the others.
Therefore, each awakened reader must recheck the condition before proceeding.
Proper synchronization is necessary to avoid races between awakened readers.


5. How does user space set O_NONBLOCK?
The application specifies the O_NONBLOCK flag when opening the device.

Example:

open("/dev/mydev", O_RDONLY | O_NONBLOCK);
Alternatively, it can be enabled later using the fcntl() system call.
The kernel stores this flag in the file descriptor's status flags.
The driver can check whether non-blocking mode is requested and return immediately instead of sleeping.
